.TH STRPTIME 3am "Oct 02 2019"
.SH NAME
strptime \- parse a date string
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft CW
@load "strptime"
.sp
timeval = strptime(string, format)
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I strptime
extension adds a single function:
.TP
.B strptime()
This function takes two arguments, a string representing a date and time,
and a format string describing the data in the string. It calls the
C library
.IR strptime (3)
function with the given values.
If the parsing succeeds,
the return value is a number in standard seconds-since-the-epoch format.
(This is the same as
.IR gawk 's
built-in
.B systime()
function.)
Otherwise it returns \-1 upon error. In the latter case,
.B ERRNO
indicates the problem.
.\" .SH NOTES
.\" .SH BUGS
.SH EXAMPLE
.ft CW
.nf
@load "strptime"

# Printed time values should be identical.
BEGIN {
    format = "%b %d %H:%M:%S %Z %Y"
    now = systime()
    print now, "<" (result = strftime(format, now)) ">",
        strptime(result, format)
    then = strptime(result, format)
    print strftime(format, then)
}
.fi
.ft R
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR "GAWK: Effective AWK Programming" ,
.IR strptime (3).
.SH AUTHOR
Arnold Robbins,
.BR arnold@skeeve.com .
.SH COPYING PERMISSIONS
Copyright \(co 2019,
Arnold David Robbins.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.ig
Permission is granted to process this file through troff and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual page).
..
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual page under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual page into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in
a translation approved by the Foundation.
.\" vim: set filetype=nroff :
