<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html lang="en" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="content-type" />

    <title>XHTML2DOC</title>

    <meta content="February 2025" name="date" />

    <meta content="3am" name="section" />

    <meta content="GAWK Extension Library (gawkextlib)" name="source" />

    <meta content="GNU Awk Extension Modules" name="manual" />
  </head>

  <body>
    <h1 title="xhtml2doc">xhtml2doc</h1>

    <h2>NAME</h2>

    <p>xhtml2doc - generate manual pages or Texinfo sections from a restricted
    XHTML source.</p>

    <h2 class="man">SYNOPSIS</h2>

    <h2 class="texi">USAGE</h2>

    <pre>gawk [<i>options</i>] -f <b>xhtml2man</b> <i>xhtml-file</i>
gawk [<i>options</i>] -f <b>xhtml2texi</b> <i>xhtml-file</i></pre>

    <h2>DESCRIPTION</h2>

    <p>The <code>xhtml2man</code> and <code>xhtml2texi</code> awk scripts can
    generate both troff-formatted manual pages and/or texi-formatted document
    sections from a specialized <code>xhtml</code> source file. Options are
    passed as <code>-v <i>option</i>=<i>value</i></code> arguments in the
    command line.</p>

    <p>Common options:</p>

    <dl>
      <dt>OUTFILE=<i>file</i></dt>

      <dd>Name of the generated file. Default is the same name of the source
      with the <code>.xhtml</code> suffix changed either to the man section
      name or to <code>.texi</code>.</dd>
    </dl>

    <p>Options for the <code>xhtml2texi</code> conversion only:</p>

    <dl>
      <dt>TOPLEVEL=(chapter/section)</dt>

      <dd>The <code>Texinfo</code> section level generated by the
      <code>&lt;h1&gt;</code> tag. Default "<code>section</code>".</dd>

      <dt>NUMBERLEVEL=(0..4)</dt>

      <dd>The maximum <code>&lt;h<i>n</i>&gt;</code> tag that generates
      numbered sections in the Texinfo document. Default 2.</dd>

      <dt>NODELEVEL=(0..4)</dt>

      <dd>The maximum <code>&lt;h<i>n</i>&gt;</code> tag that generates nodes
      in the Info document. Default 2.</dd>

      <dt>MENULEVEL=(0..4)</dt>

      <dd>The maximum <code>&lt;h<i>n</i>&gt;</code> tag that generates
      automatic menus in the Info document. Default 2.</dd>
    </dl>

    <p>In all cases the effective maximum numbered or node heading is
    "<code>subsubsection</code>"</p>

    <h3><code>xhtml2man</code> specific HTML elements</h3>

    <p>Required elements are marked as <code>**</code>. Sample <i>values</i>
    correspond to this manpage.</p>

    <ul>
      <li><code>**</code>
      <code>&lt;title&gt;<i>XHTML2DOC</i>&lt;/title&gt;</code><br />(short
      title, in caps)</li>

      <li><code>**</code> <code>&lt;meta name="section"
      content="<i>3am</i>"/&gt;</code> <br />(the manpage section: 1, 2,
      ...)</li>

      <li><code>**</code> <code>&lt;meta name="date" content="<i>February
      2025</i>"/&gt;</code> <br />(date of the last nontrivial update)</li>

      <li><code>**</code> <code>&lt;meta name="source" content="<i>GAWK
      Extension Library (gawkextlib)</i>"/&gt;</code> <br />(the global entity
      that provides this manpage)</li>

      <li><code>**</code> <code>&lt;meta name="manual" content="<i>GNU Awk
      Extension Modules</i>"/&gt;</code> <br />(the documentation set to which
      the manpage belongs)</li>

      <li><code>--</code> <code>&lt;h1&gt;<i>xhtml2doc</i>&lt;/h1&gt;</code>
      <br />(ignored, useful only for conversion to Texi)</li>

      <li><code>**</code> <code>&lt;h2&gt;NAME&lt;/h2&gt;&lt;p&gt;<i>xhtml2doc
      - generate manual pages ...</i>&lt;/p&gt;</code> <br />(first main
      section, with one-line short description of the utility, prepended with
      the utility name in lowercase and a dash)</li>

      <li><code>--</code> <code>&lt;h2&gt;<i>SYNOPSIS</i>&lt;/h2&gt;</code>
      <br />(other main sections: SYNOPSIS, DESCRIPTION, NOTES, AUTHORS,
      ...)</li>

      <li><code>--</code> <code>&lt;h<i>x</i>&gt;<i>Conditional
      elements</i>&lt;/h<i>x</i>&gt;</code> <br />(<i>x</i>=3,4,..:
      subsections)</li>
    </ul>

    <h3><code>xhtml2texi</code> specific HTML elements</h3>

    <p>Required elements are marked as <code>**</code>. Elements marked as
    <code>*-</code> are only required if the document section is in fact a
    manpage to be formatted as Texinfo. Sample <i>values</i> correspond to
    this manpage.</p>

    <ul>
      <li><code>**</code> <code>&lt;h1&gt;<i>xhtml2doc</i>&lt;/h1&gt;</code>
      <br />(title of the section or chapter)</li>

      <li><code>*-</code> <code>&lt;h2&gt;NAME&lt;/h2&gt;&lt;p&gt;<i>xhtml2doc
      - generate manual pages ...</i>&lt;/p&gt;</code> <br />(NAME section,
      with one-line short description of the utility, prepended with the
      utility name in lowercase and a dash)</li>

      <li><code>--</code> <code>&lt;h<i>x</i>&gt;<i>Conditional
      elements</i>&lt;/h<i>x</i>&gt;</code> <br />(<i>x</i>=2,3,..: other
      sections, indexed by the whole title)</li>

      <li><code>--</code> <code>&lt;h<i>x</i>
      title="<i>index-term</i>"&gt;<i>...</i>&lt;/h<i>x</i>&gt;</code>
      <br />(<i>x</i>=2,3,..: other sections, indexed by the
      <i>index-term</i>)</li>

      <li><code>--</code>
      <code>&lt;dfn&gt;<i>defined-term</i>&lt;/dfn&gt;</code>
      <br />(<i>defined-term</i> indexed as such)</li>

      <li><code>--</code> <code>&lt;dfn
      title="<i>index-term</i>"&gt;<i>defined-term</i>&lt;/dfn&gt;</code>
      <br />(<i>defined-term</i> indexed by the <i>index-term</i>)</li>
    </ul>

    <h3>General supported XHTML elements</h3>

    <p>The XHTML source files can use the following tags to generate contents
    in the <code>&lt;body&gt;</code> part.</p>

    <pre>&lt;div&gt;      block fragment
&lt;span&gt;     inline fragment
&lt;dl&gt;       definition list
&lt;dt&gt;       definition term
&lt;dd&gt;       definition paragraph
&lt;ol&gt;       numbered list
&lt;ul&gt;       bulleted list 
&lt;li&gt;       list item
&lt;pre&gt;      preformatted text
&lt;br&gt;       line break
&lt;em&gt;       italic
&lt;i&gt;        italic
&lt;var&gt;      italic
&lt;b&gt;        boldface
&lt;strong&gt;   boldface
&lt;code&gt;     monospace
&lt;kbd&gt;      monospace
&lt;samp&gt;     monospace
&lt;tt&gt;       monospace</pre>

    <p>Partially supported, and only with <code>xhtml2texi</code>:</p>

    <pre>&lt;table&gt;    table
&lt;col&gt;      column specification
&lt;tr&gt;       table row
&lt;th&gt;       table header
&lt;td&gt;       table cell</pre>

    <h3>Conditional elements</h3>

    <p>The same XHTML source can be used to generate both a manpage and a
    Texinfo section. The class attribute of any tag can be used to process the
    element only in one alternative.</p>

    <ul>
      <li><code>&lt;<i>xx</i> class="man" ...&gt;...&lt;/<i>xx</i>&gt;</code>
      (processed only by <code>xhtml2man</code>)</li>

      <li><code>&lt;<i>xx</i> class="texi" ...&gt;...&lt;/<i>xx</i>&gt;</code>
      (processed only by <code>xhtml2texi</code>)</li>
    </ul>

    <p>Tags with a <code>class</code> attribute with values other than
    <code>man</code> or <code>texi</code> are fully ignored, i.e., neither the
    tag nor its content is processed.</p>

    <h3>Unsupported elements</h3>

    <p>Elements not listed before are not supported. The tag itself is ignored
    but its content is processed.</p>

    <h2 class="texi">LIMITATIONS</h2>

    <p><code>&lt;dfn&gt;</code> inside &lt;<code>h<i>n</i>&gt;</code> section
    titles is ignored.</p>

    <p><code>&lt;div&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;span&gt;</code> are only useful
    as conditional elements.</p>

    <h2>SEE ALSO</h2>

    <p><i>XML Processing With gawk</i>, <i>man-pages(7)</i>, <i>groff(7)</i>,
    <i>Texinfo</i>.</p>

    <div class="man"><h2 class="man">AUTHOR</h2><p>Manuel Collado,
    <b>m-collado@users.sourceforge.net</b>.</p><h2 class="man">COPYING
    PERMISSIONS</h2><p>Copyright (C) 2025, Free Software Foundation,
    Inc.</p><p>Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
    this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
    are preserved on all copies.</p><p>Permission is granted to copy and
    distribute modified versions of this manual page under the conditions for
    verbatim copying, provided that the entire resulting derived work is
    distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
    one.</p><p>Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of
    this manual page into another language, under the above conditions for
    modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
    translation approved by the Foundation.</p></div>
  </body>
</html>
