<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html lang="en" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="content-type" />

    <title>XMLBASE</title>

    <meta content="January 2017" name="date" />

    <meta content="3am" name="section" />

    <meta content="GAWK Extension Library (gawkextlib)" name="source" />

    <meta content="GNU Awk Extension Modules" name="manual" />
  </head>

  <body>
    <h1>xmlbase</h1>

    <h2>NAME</h2>

    <p>add some basic functionality to gawk-xml.</p>

    <h2 class="man">SYNOPSIS</h2>

    <h2 class="texi" title="xmlbase Usage">USAGE</h2>

    <pre>@include "xmlbase"

result = XmlEscape(str)
result = XmlEscapeQuote(str)

XmlWriteError(message)
XmlCheckError()</pre>

    <h2 title="xmlbase Description">DESCRIPTION</h2>

    <p>The <i>xmlbase</i> awk library adds some basic facilities to the
    gawk-xml extension.</p>

    <dl>
      <dt><i>Automatic error reporting</i></dt>

      <dd>The <i>xmlbase</i> library contains a rule that automatically
      invokes <b>XmlCheckError()</b> at <b>ENDFILE</b>.</dd>

      <dt>XmlEscape(str)</dt>

      <dd>Returns the string argument with the basic XML metacharacters (&lt;,
      &gt;, &amp;) replaced by their predefined XML escape sequences.</dd>

      <dt>XmlEscapeQuote(str)</dt>

      <dd>Returns the string argument with all the XML metacharacters (&lt;,
      &gt;, &amp;, ", ') replaced by their predefined XML escape
      sequences.</dd>

      <dt>XmlWriteError(message)</dt>

      <dd>Prints a formatted diagnostic message showing <b>FILENAME</b>,
      <b>XMLROW</b>, <b>XMLCOL</b>, <b>XMLLEN</b> and the string
      argument.</dd>

      <dt>XmlCheckError()</dt>

      <dd>If either <b>XMLERROR</b> or <b>ERRNO</b> have a non-null value,
      invokes <i>XmlWriteError()</i> on it. XMLERROR takes precedence over
      ERRNO. If ERRNO is used then it is cleared, to avoid duplicated error
      reports.</dd>
    </dl>

    <h2 title="xmlbase Notes">NOTES</h2>

    <p>The <i>xmlbase</i> library automatically loads the <b>xml</b> gawk
    extension.</p>

    <h2 class="man">BUGS</h2>

    <h2 class="texi" title="xmlbase Limitations">LIMITATIONS</h2>

    <p>The error reporting facility may not suit everybody.</p>

    <div class="man"><h2>AUTHOR</h2><p>Manuel Collado,
    <b>m-collado@users.sourceforge.net</b>.</p><h2>SEE ALSO</h2><p><i>XML
    Processing With gawk</i>, <i>xmlcopy</i>(3am), <i>xmltree</i>(3am),
    <i>xmlsimple</i>(3am), <i>xmlwrite</i>(3am).</p><h2>COPYING
    PERMISSIONS</h2><p>Copyright (C) 2017, Free Software Foundation,
    Inc.</p><p>Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
    this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
    are preserved on all copies.</p><p>Permission is granted to copy and
    distribute modified versions of this manual page under the conditions for
    verbatim copying, provided that the entire resulting derived work is
    distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
    one.</p><p>Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of
    this manual page into another language, under the above conditions for
    modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
    translation approved by the Foundation.</p></div>
  </body>
</html>
