<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html lang="en" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="content-type" />

    <title>XMLCOPY</title>

    <meta content="January 2017" name="date" />

    <meta content="3am" name="section" />

    <meta content="GAWK Extension Library (gawkextlib)" name="source" />

    <meta content="GNU Awk Extension Modules" name="manual" />
  </head>

  <body>
    <h1 title="xmlcopy">xmlcopy</h1>

    <h2>NAME</h2>

    <p>xmlcopy - add token reconstruction facilities to gawk-xml.</p>

    <h2 class="man">SYNOPSIS</h2>

    <h2 class="texi">USAGE</h2>

    <pre>@include "xmlcopy"

result = XmlToken()
XmlCopy()

XmlSetAttribute(name, value)
XmlIgnoreAttribute(name)</pre>

    <h2>DESCRIPTION</h2>

    <p>The <i>xmlcopy</i> awk library adds the ability to reconstruct the
    current XML token. The token can be modified before reconstruction.</p>

    <h3>Token reconstruction</h3>

    <dl>
      <dt>XmlToken()</dt>

      <dd>Returns an XML string that represents the current token. The token
      is reconstructed from the predefined variables <b>XMLEVENT</b>,
      <b>XMLNAME</b>, <b>XMLATTR</b> and <b>$0</b>. They can have the original
      current token values or user modified ones.</dd>

      <dt>XmlCopy()</dt>

      <dd>Writes an XML string that represents the current token, as returned
      by <i>XmlToken()</i>.</dd>
    </dl>

    <h3>Token modification</h3>

    <dl>
      <dt>XmlSetAttribute(name, value)</dt>

      <dd>Adds or replaces the (<i>name</i>, <i>value</i>) entry in
      <b>XMLATTR</b>. Adds <i>name</i> to <b>$0</b> if not already in it.</dd>

      <dt>XmlIgnoreAttribute(name)</dt>

      <dd>Removes <i>name</i> from <b>$0</b>, so <i>XmlToken()</i> will ignore
      it. Keeps <b>XMLATTR</b> unchanged..</dd>
    </dl>

    <h2>NOTES</h2>

    <p>The <i>xmlcopy</i> library includes the <i>xmlbase</i> library. Its
    functionality is implicitly available.</p>

    <h2 class="man">BUGS</h2>

    <h2 class="texi">LIMITATIONS</h2>

    <p>When an XML declaration is reconstructed, the advertised encoding may
    not match the actual encoding.</p>

    <div class="man"><h2 class="man">SEE ALSO</h2><p><i>XML Processing With
    gawk</i>, <i>xmlbase</i>(3am), <i>xmltree</i>(3am), <i>xmlsimple</i>(3am),
    <i>xmlwrite</i>(3am).</p><h2 class="man">AUTHOR</h2><p>Manuel Collado,
    <b>m-collado@users.sourceforge.net</b>.</p><h2 class="man">COPYING
    PERMISSIONS</h2><p>Copyright (C) 2017, Free Software Foundation,
    Inc.</p><p>Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
    this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
    are preserved on all copies.</p><p>Permission is granted to copy and
    distribute modified versions of this manual page under the conditions for
    verbatim copying, provided that the entire resulting derived work is
    distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
    one.</p><p>Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of
    this manual page into another language, under the above conditions for
    modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
    translation approved by the Foundation.</p></div>
  </body>
</html>
