.TH SELECT 3am "Jan 15 2013" "Free Software Foundation" "GNU Awk Extension Modules"
.SH NAME
select \- enable I/O multiplexing, non-blocking I/O, and signal trapping
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft CW
@load "select"
.sp
result = kill(<pid>, <signal number or name>)
.br
string = select_signal(<signal number or name>, {default|ignore|trap} [, <override>])
.br
fd = input_fd(<file or command> [, <redirection type>])
.br
fd = output_fd(<file or command>, <redirection type>)
.br
result = set_non_blocking(<file or command or fd number> [, <redirection type>])
.br
result = select(<readfds>, <writefds>, <exceptfds>, <timeout>, <signals>)
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I select
extension adds six functions as follows:
.TP
.B kill()
This function calls 
.IR kill (2)
to send a signal to a
process.  The second argument may be specified as an integer or
as a standard signal name defined on this system.  The names are not
case-sensitive, and the leading "SIG" is optional.  It returns the
value returned by the
.B kill
system call.  If the return code is negative, it updates
.B ERRNO.
.TP
.B select_signal()
This function uses
.IR sigaction (2)
to change signal actions.  The first signal argument may be specified
as an integer or as a standard signal name defined on this system.
The names are not case-sensitive, and the leading "SIG" is optional. 
The second argument must be a string equal to
.B default,
.B ignore,
or
.B trap.
If the previously installed handler is the default handler or ignore
or our standard trapping handler, then the new value is installed.
If the previous handler is not recognized, then the new handler is not
installed unless the 3rd override argument is present, is numeric, and
is non-zero.  This function returns "" on error, otherwise a string describing
the previously installed handler:
.B default,
.B ignore,
.B trap,
or
.B unknown.
Any trapped signals will be reported synchronously in the results from the
.B select
function.
.TP
.B input_fd()
Look up the file or command and return the associated input file descriptor value
or -1 on error.  If the first argument is "", then it returns the fd for the
currently open file corresponding to
.B FILENAME.
Otherwise, the second argument is required and must have one of the following
values:
.B >
a file opened for output;
.B >>
a file opened for append;
.B <
a file opened for input;
.B |>
a pipe used for output;
.B |<
a pipe used for input;
.B |&
a two-way coprocess.
The file or command will be opened or started if gawk has not done so
previously.
.TP
.B output_fd()
This is similar to
.IR input_fd
but returns a file descriptor suitable for output.  Note that gawk may choose
to use a different file descriptor for coprocess input and output.
For this function, two arguments are required.  On error, -1 is returned.
.TP
.B set_non_blocking()
If the first argument is "", then the 2nd argument is not required,
and the currently open file corresponding to
.BR FILENAME
will be set to non-blocking by using
.IR fcntl (2)
to turn on
.IR O_NONBLOCK.
 Similarly, if the first argument is numeric, we
simply set that file descriptor to be non-blocking.  Otherwise, we look up the
<file or command> and <redirection type>.  This returns 0 on success or -1
on error.  If this argument is a two-way coprocess that defines different input
and output file descriptors, we set the input side to be non-blocking.  For
finer control, please use
.IR input_fd
or
.IR output_fd
to specify which file descriptor to configure for non-blocking behavior.
If the first argument is a name and not a file descriptor, and we are
able to configure non-blocking mode successfully, and it is not an
output-only file, we also automatically create the array entry
.BR PROCINFO
[<file or command>, "RETRY"]
so that I/O will automatically be retried
for input from this file.
.TP
.B select()
This function 
returns -1 on error or the number of file descriptors that matched.
On return, the <signals> array contains a list of signals that were trapped
since the last call.  The index is the signal number, and the value
will be the symbolic signal name (e.g. "INT") if we are able to look it up.
If <timeout> is present and numeric, that is the maximum number of seconds
to wait.  Otherwise, it will block indefinitely.
The <readfds>, <writefds>, and <exceptfds> arrays will have the <command>
in the index, and the <command type> as the value.  This works the same
way as the set_non_blocking function.  If the index value is numeric
and the value is "", it will be treated as a file descriptor.
.SH NOTES
One note regarding signal behavior: the extension uses sigaction to request
that signal calls be restarted.  But on Linux, the "select" is always
interrupted in any case.  So that's nice -- the signals get delivered quickly.
On Cygwin, I noticed that select does seem to restart, so the signal is
not delivered to the application right away.
... .SH BUGS
.SH EXAMPLE
.ft CW
.nf
Please refer to
.BR multiplex.awk
and 
.BR multiplex2.awk
which are included in the distribution.
.fi
.ft R
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR kill (2),
.BR sigaction (2),
.BR select (2),
.BR fcntl (2)
.SH AUTHOR
Andrew Schorr
.SH COPYING PERMISSIONS
Copyright \(co 2012, 2013,
Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.ig
Permission is granted to process this file through troff and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual page).
..
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual page under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual page into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in
a translation approved by the Foundation.
