.TH JSON 3am "Jul 26 2024" "Free Software Foundation" "GNU Awk Extension Modules"
.SH NAME
json \- gawk extension to import from and export to JSON format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft CW
.nf
@load "json"
.sp
status = json::from_json(string, array)
.sp
encoded = json::to_json(array [, use_real_array])
.sp 2
# compatibility functions in json_compat.awk:
@include "json_compat"
.sp
status = json_fromJSON(string, array)
.sp
encoded = json_toJSON(array [, use_real_array])
.fi
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
JSON objects represent associations of names with values,
what we will call
.I linear
arrays (arrays with numeric indices), and subgroupings (nested associative
arrays).
Such objects map well onto
.IR gawk 's
true multidimensional associative arrays.  This extension
provides a mechanism to encode a
.I gawk
array as a JSON string and to decode a JSON object into a
.I gawk
array.
.PP
The
.I json
extension adds two functions
as follows:
.TP
\fBjson::from_json(\fIstring\fP, \fIarray\fP\^)\fR
This function takes a 
.I string
representing a JSON object and decodes
it into the
.I array
argument.  The array is cleared first.
The return status is one upon success or zero upon failure.
In addition,
.IR gawk 's
.B ERRNO
variable is updated to (sort of) indicate what the problem was.
.TP
\fBjson::to_json(\fIarray\fP\^[, \fIuse_real_array\fP])\fR
This function takes an
.I array
argument and encodes the array contents as a JSON object in the returned
string.  The returned string will be empty if an error of some kind
occurred.
In addition,
.IR gawk 's
.B ERRNO
variable is updated to (sort of) indicate what the problem was.
.sp
If the optional parameter
.I use_real_array
is not zero,
.B json::to_json()
encodes arrays indexed from 1 to
.I N
as JSON linear arrays, instead of as associative arrays. This
gives a better rendition into JSON, at the expense of some additional
CPU time to verify that the array is indeed indexed linearly.
.SH BUGS
The mapping between
.I gawk
objects and JSON objects isn't perfect.
In particular,
typed regular expression constants in
.I gawk
are encoded as a string, with the regexp bracketed by
.B @/
and
.BR / .
For example, \fBpattern:"@/[a-z]+[0-9]?/"\fR.
Also, on versions of the
.I gawk
API prior to 3.2,
JSON boolean objects map to 1 or 0, losing the type distinction.
.PP
The
.B json_compat.awk
library file provides compatibility functions for the previous
version of this extension, which did not take advantage of
.IR gawk 's
namespace facility.
.SH EXAMPLE
.ft CW
.nf
@load "filefuncs"
@load "json"
\&...
BEGIN {
	stat("/etc/passwd", data)
	statinfo = json::to_json(data)
	print statinfo
}

BEGIN {
	getline statinfo
	if (! json::from_json(statinfo, data))
		print "JSON import failed!" > "/dev/stderr"
		exit 1
	}

	# do something with the info
}
.fi
.ft R
.SH NOTES
This extension uses RapidJSON to parse a JSON document into a
.I gawk
array. This approximates the Document Object Model (DOM) paradigm.
In the author's humble opinion, the SAX paradigm for parsing JSON does
not match well with
.BR awk 's
design. If you want SAX parsing of JSON, this isn't the place.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
JSON home page:	\f(CWhttps://www.json.org/\fP
.PP
Wikipedia:		\f(CWhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON\fP
.PP
RapidJSON home page:	\f(CWhttp://rapidjson.org/\fP
.SH AUTHOR
Arnold D. Robbins
.SH COPYING PERMISSIONS
Copyright \(co 2017, the Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.br
Copyright \(co 2017, 2020,
Arnold David Robbins.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.ig
Permission is granted to process this file through troff and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual page).
..
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual page under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual page into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in
a translation approved by the Foundation.
.\" vim: set filetype=nroff :
