<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html lang="en" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="content-type" />
    <title>csv</title>
    <meta content="May 2016" name="date" />
    <meta content="3am" name="section" />
    <meta content="GAWK Extension Library (gawkextlib)" name="source" />
    <meta content="GNU Awk Extension Modules" name="manual" />
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1 title="csvformat">CSV data generation</h1>
    <h2 class="man">NAME</h2>
    <p>Adds facilities for creating comma-separed-values (CVS) data.</p>
    <h2 class="man">SYNOPSIS</h2>
    <h2 class="texi" title="csvformat Usage">USAGE</h2>
    <pre><b>@include "csv"</b>
...
<i>result</i> = <b>csvcompose</b>(<i>afield</i>, <i>option</i>...)
<i>result</i> = <b>csvformat</b>(<i>record</i>, <i>option</i>...)</pre>
    <h2 title="csvformat Description">DESCRIPTION</h2>
    <p>The <i>csv</i> awk library provides functions for composing CSV data
    records:</p>
    <dl>
      <dt><dfn>csvcompose</dfn>(<i>afield</i> [, <i>comma</i> [,
      <i>quote</i>]])</dt>
      <dd>Returns a CSV formatted string by composing the values in the
      <i>afield</i> array. The arguments are as follows:<dl>
          <dt>afield</dt>
          <dd>An array of field values, indexed from 1 to <i>N</i>.</dd>
          <dt>comma</dt>
          <dd>Optional. The desired CSV field delimiter. Default comma
          ','.</dd>
          <dt>quote</dt>
          <dd>Optional. The desired CSV quoting character. Default double
          quote '"'.</dd>
        </dl></dd>
      <dt><dfn>csvformat</dfn>(<i>record</i>, [<i>fs</i> [, <i>comma</i> [,
      <i>quote</i>]]]])</dt>
      <dd>Returns a CSV formatted string by composing the fields in the
      <i>record</i> string. The arguments are as follows:<dl>
          <dt>record</dt>
          <dd>A string record with fields delimited by <i>fs</i>.</dd>
          <dt>fs</dt>
          <dd>Optional. The actual field separator in <i>record</i>. Default a
          null char '\0'.</dd>
          <dt>comma</dt>
          <dd>Optional. The desired CSV field delimiter. Default comma
          ','.</dd>
          <dt>quote</dt>
          <dd>Optional. The desired CSV quoting character. Default double
          quote '"'.</dd>
        </dl></dd>
      <dt><dfn>csvprint</dfn>()</dt>
      <dd>A CSVMODE aware convenience function to print the current record.
      Prints either $0 as such or CSVRECORD, depending of the current
      mode.</dd>
    </dl>
    <h2 title="csvformat Examples">EXAMPLES</h2>
    <p>Explicit CSV composition:</p>
    <pre>f[1] = "007"
f[2] = "Bond, James"
f[3] = "United Kingdom"
result = csvcompose(f)  # -&gt; '007,"Bond, James",United Kingdom'
result = csvcompose(f, ";")  # -&gt; '007;Bond, James;United Kingdom'

record = "007/Bond, James/United Kingdom"
result = csvformat(record, "/")  # -&gt; '007,"Bond, James",United Kingdom'
result = csvformat(record, "/", ";")  # -&gt; '007;Bond, James;United Kingdom'</pre>
    <p>Print records that contain commas as data, in both normal and CSV
    modes:</p>
    <pre>grepcommas.awk:
BEGINFILE {
    CSVMODE = (FILENAME ~ /\.csv$/)
}
/,/ { csvprint() }

Sample invocation:
gawk -f grepcommas.awk a.txt, b.csv, c.txt</pre>
    <h2 title="xmlbase Notes">NOTES</h2>
    <p>The <i>csv</i> library automatically loads the CSV extension.</p>
    <h2 class="man">BUGS</h2>
    <h2 class="texi" title="csvformat Limitations">LIMITATIONS</h2>
    <div class="man"><h2>AUTHOR</h2><p>Manuel Collado,
    <b>m-collado@users.sourceforge.net</b>.</p><h2>SEE ALSO</h2><p><i>CSV
    Processing With gawk</i>, <i>csvparse(3am)</i>,
    <i>csvmode(3am)</i>.</p><h2>COPYING PERMISSIONS</h2><p>Copyright (C) 2016,
    Free Software Foundation, Inc.</p><p>Permission is granted to make and
    distribute verbatim copies of this manual page provided the copyright
    notice and this permission notice are preserved on all
    copies.</p><p>Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
    versions of this manual page under the conditions for verbatim copying,
    provided that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the
    terms of a permission notice identical to this one.</p><p>Permission is
    granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual page into
    another language, under the above conditions for modified versions, except
    that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved by the
    Foundation.</p></div>
  </body>
</html>
