@node csvparse
@section CSV parse functions
Extends gawk with facilities for parsing comma-separated-values (CVS) data.
@unnumberedsubsec USAGE

@example
@strong{@@load "csv"}             (or @strong{@@include "csv"}, see NOTE 1)
...
CSVFS = ...
CSVCOMMA = ...
CSVQUOTE = ...
...
@emph{result} = @strong{csvconvert}(@emph{csvrecord}, @emph{option}...)
@emph{n} = @strong{csvsplit}(@emph{csvrecord}, @emph{afield}, @emph{option}...)
@emph{result} = @strong{csvunquote}(@emph{csvfield}, @emph{option})      (see NOTE 1)
@end example

@unnumberedsubsec DESCRIPTION
The @emph{csv} gawk extension adds functions for parsing CSV data in a simple way. The predefined @code{CSVFS}, @code{CSVCOMMA} and @code{CSVQUOTE} variables set default values for the optional arguments.

@table @asis
@item @strong{CSVFS}
@cindex CSVFS
The field delimiter used in the resulting clean text record, initialized to a null character '\0'.
@item @strong{CSCOMMA}
@cindex CSCOMMA
The default field delimiter of the CSV input text, initialized to comma ','.
@item @strong{CSVQUOTE}
@cindex CSVQUOTE
The default quoting character of the CSV input text, initialized to double quote '"'.
@item @strong{csvconvert(@emph{csvrecord} [, @emph{fs} [, @emph{comma} [, @emph{quote}]]])}
@cindex csvconvert
Returns the CSV formatted string argument converted to a regular awk record with fixed field separators. Returns a null string if @emph{csvrecord} is not a valid string. The arguments are as follows:

@table @asis
@item @strong{csvrecord}
The CSV formatted input string
@item @strong{fs}
The resulting field separator. Default @code{CSVFS}.
@item @strong{comma}
The input CSV field delimiter. Default @code{CSVCOMMA}.
@item @strong{quote}
The input CSV quoting character. Default @code{CSVQUOTE}.
@end table

@item @strong{csvsplit(@emph{csvrecord}, @emph{afield} [, @emph{comma} [, @emph{quote}]]])}
@cindex csvsplit
Splits the CSV formatted string argument into an array of individual clean text fields and returns the number of fields. Returns -1 if @emph{csvrecord} is not a valid string. The arguments are as follows:

@table @asis
@item @strong{csvrecord}
The CSV formatted input string
@item @strong{afield}
The resulting array of fields.
@item @strong{comma}
The input CSV field delimiter. Default @code{CSVCOMMA}.
@item @strong{quote}
The input CSV quoting character. Default @code{CSVQUOTE}.
@end table

@item @strong{csvunquote(@emph{csvfield} [, @emph{quote}])}
@cindex csvunquote
Returns the clean text value of the CSV string argument. Returns a null string if @emph{csvfield} is not a valid string. The arguments are as follows:

@table @asis
@item @strong{csvfield}
The CSV formatted input string
@item @strong{quote}
The input CSV quoting character. Default @code{CSVQUOTE}.
@end table

@end table

@unnumberedsubsec EXAMPLES
Process CSV input records as arrays of fields:

@example
@{
    csvsplit($0, fields)
    if (fields[2]=="some value") print
@}
@end example

Process CSV input records as awk regular records:

@example
BEGIN @{FS = "\0"@}
@{
    CSVRECORD = $0
    $0 = csvconvert($0)
    if ($2=="some value") print CSVRECORD
@}
@end example

@unnumberedsubsec NOTES
@strong{(1)} The @code{csvunquote()} function requires @code{@@include "csv"} instead of @code{@@load "csv"}. The included @code{csv.awk} library automatically loads the csv extension.
@unnumberedsubsec LIMITATIONS
Null characters are not allowed in fields. A null character terminates the record processing.