\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@setfilename gawk-csv.info
@comment include version.texi

@set TITLE CSV Processing With @command{gawk}
@set SUBTITLE A User's Guide for the CSV extension of GNU Awk
@set EDITION 1.0
@set UPDATE-MONTH March, 2017
@c gawk-csv versions:
@set VERSION 0.1
@set PATCHLEVEL 0
@settitle CSV Processing With @command{gawk}
@syncodeindex pg cp
@comment %**end of header

@copying
Copyright (C) 2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@sp 2

This is Edition @value{EDITION} of @cite{@value{TITLE}},
for the @value{VERSION}.@value{PATCHLEVEL} (or later) version of the
CSV extension of the GNU implementation of AWK.
@sp 1

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'', with the
Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual'', and with the Back-Cover Texts
as in (a) below.
@ifclear FOR_PRINT
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end ifclear
@ifset FOR_PRINT
A copy of the license
may be found on the Internet at
@uref{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html,
the GNU Project's website}.
@end ifset

@enumerate a
@item
The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to
copy and modify this GNU manual.''
@end enumerate

@end copying

@ifinfo
This file documents the CSV processing extension in GNU @command{awk}.

@insertcopying
@end ifinfo

@dircategory CSV text processing system
@direntry
* gawk-csv: (gawk-csv).	CSV Processing With @command{gawk}.
@end direntry

@iftex
@set DOCUMENT book
@set CHAPTER chapter
@set SECTION section
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@set DOCUMENT Info file
@set CHAPTER major node
@set SECTION node
@end ifinfo
@ifhtml
@set DOCUMENT web page
@set CHAPTER chapter
@set SECTION section
@end ifhtml

@set FSF

@set FN file name
@set FFN File Name

@c merge the function and variable indexes into the concept index
@ifinfo
@synindex fn cp
@synindex vr cp
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@end iftex

@c If "finalout" is commented out, the printed output will show
@c black boxes that mark lines that are too long.  Thus, it is
@c unwise to comment it out when running a master in case there are
@c overfulls which are deemed okay.

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@comment smallbook

@setchapternewpage odd

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle @value{SUBTITLE}
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATE-MONTH}
@author Manuel Collado

@c Include the Distribution inside the titlepage environment so
@c that headings are turned off.  Headings on and off do not work.

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@sp 2
Published by:
@sp 1

Free Software Foundation @*
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor @*
Boston, MA 02110-1335 USA @*
Phone: +1-617-542-5942 @*
Fax: +1-617-542-2652 @*
Email: @email{gnu@@gnu.org} @*
URL: @uref{http://www.gnu.org/} @*

@c ISBN 1-882114-??-0 @*

@insertcopying

@c @sp 2
@c Cover art by ?????.
@end titlepage

@iftex
@headings off
@evenheading @thispage@ @ @ @strong{@value{TITLE}} @| @|
@oddheading  @| @| @strong{@thischapter}@ @ @ @thispage
@end iftex

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top General Introduction
@comment node-name, next,          previous, up

This file documents the CSV extension of GNU Awk (@command{gawk}).
This extension allows direct processing of CSV files with @command{gawk}.

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* CSV Extension Tutorial::
* CSV Extension Reference::
* CSV Specification::
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

The CSV extension of gawk provides facilities for handling input and output CSV formatted data.

On input, CSV records can be processed individually. There are CSV parsing
functions that can extract field values from a CSV record or convert the
CSV record into a plain text record with fixed field delimiters.

It is also possible to process whole CSV data files by automatically reading
and converting each CSV record and delivering it as $0, $1, .. $NF, as if it were
a simple text tabular data file.

On output, CSV formatted records can be generated from either an array of
field values or from a simple text record with fixed field delimiters.

The CSV format is not well standardized. The gawk CSV extension can handle
cvs-like data with custom field delimiter and quoting characters.

@c @node CSV Extension Tutorial
@c @chapter CSV Extension Tutorial
@include gawk-csv-tutorial.texi

@node CSV Extension Reference
@chapter CSV Extension Reference
@c index CSV

@menu
* csvparse:: 
* csvmode:: 
* csvformat:: 
@end menu

This @value{CHAPTER} is meant to be a reference.
It collects the manual pages that describe each feature or group of features.
These manual pages are also available separately.
The first two sections describe builtin features, while the third describes
facilities implemented as awk code library.

@page
@c @node csvparse
@c @section csvparse
@include csvparse.texi

@page
@c @node csvmode
@c @section csvmode
@include csvmode.texi

@page
@c @node csvformat
@c @section csvformat
@include csv.texi

@node CSV Specification
@appendix CSV Specification

The term CSV means "Comma-Separated Values". It is a plain text format
usually used by spreadsheets and database engines for interchange of
information. In spite of been widely used, the CSV file format is not
formally standardized. A commonly used definition is
@uref{https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4180, RFC 4180}.

@cindex RFC 4180

RFC 4180 is quite strict. In practice CSV aware tools accept or generate
files not strictly conformant with this specification. Usual deviations are:

@itemize
@item
Line endings: LF alone instead of CR+LF.
@item
Field delimiter character: semicolon or other specific character instead of comma.
@item
Quoting character: single quote or other specific character instead of double quote.
@item
Control characters other that line breaks allowed inside field contents.
@item
Leading and trailing space in fields are not significant and can be ignored.
@item
Etc.
@end itemize


@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@cindex FDL, GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl-1.3.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

