.TH ERRNO 3am "Jan 15 2013" "Free Software Foundation" "GNU Awk Extension Modules"
.SH NAME
errno \- convert errno values to strings and vice versa
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft CW
@load "errno"
.sp
string = strerror(11)
.br
string = errno2name(11)
.br
integer = name2errno("EAGAIN")
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I errno
extension adds three functions named
.BR strerror(),
.BR errno2name() ,
and
.BR name2errno() ,
as follows:
.TP
.B sterror()
This function takes an integer argument and returns the result from calling
the
.IR strerror (3)
C library function.  If the argument is not numeric, it will return an empty string.
.TP
.B errno2name()
This function takes an integer argument and returns the symbolic name for
the associated errno value.  For example, the returned value might be EACCES or EAGAIN.  An empty string is returned for an unrecognized argument.
.TP
.B name2errno()
This function takes a string argument and returns the integer value associated
with that symbolic errno value.  For example, if the argument is "EAGAIN",
the returned value might be 11.  For unrecognized arguments, a value of -1
is returned.
... .SH NOTES
... .SH BUGS
.SH EXAMPLE
.ft CW
.nf
@load "errno"
\&...
printf "The numeric value of 'EAGAIN' is %d\en", name2errno("EAGAIN")
printf "The string value of 11 is %s\en", errno2name(11)
printf "The description of errno 11 is '%s'\en", strerror(11)
.fi
.ft R
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR strerror (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Andrew Schorr
.SH COPYING PERMISSIONS
Copyright \(co 2012, 2013,
Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.ig
Permission is granted to process this file through troff and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual page).
..
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual page under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual page into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in
a translation approved by the Foundation.
