.TH NL_LANGINFO 3am "Jun 01 2015" "" "GNU Awk Extension Modules"
.SH NAME
nl_langinfo \- retrieve locale-specific information strings
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft CW
@load "nl_langinfo"
.sp
result = nl_langinfo(LANGINFO["\f(CIvariable\fP"])
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I nl_langinfo
extension provides an AWK interface to the
.IR nl_langinfo (3)
C library routine.  It adds a single function named
.BR nl_langinfo() ,
and an array named
.BR LANGINFO .
.PP
The single argument in a call to
.B nl_langinfo()
should be one of the available values in the
.B LANGINFO
array.
.PP
The return value is the requested string,
or the empty string if an error occurred.
.PP
The indices of
.B LANGINFO
are the names of various available strings as given in the
POSIX standard: see
\f(CWhttp://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/langinfo.h.html\fP.
For example, \f(CW"D_T_FMT"\fP is the current locale's date and time
format for use with
.IR strftime (3).
See the standard for the full list.
... .SH BUGS
.SH EXAMPLE
.ft CW
.nf
@load "nl_langinfo"

# print the time and date in the locale's format
BEGIN {
    print strftime(nl_langinfo(["D_T_"FMT"]))
}
.fi
.ft R
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR "GAWK: Effective AWK Programming" ,
.PP
.IR nl_langinfo (3).
.SH AUTHOR
Arnold Robbins,
.BR arnold@skeeve.com .
.SH COPYING PERMISSIONS
Copyright \(co 2012, 2013,
Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.br
Copyright \(co 2015, Arnold David Robbins.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.ig
Permission is granted to process this file through troff and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual page).
..
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual page under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual page into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in
a translation approved by the Foundation.
