.TH RECLEN 3am "Jul 16 2020" "Free Software Foundation" "GNU Awk Extension Modules"
.SH NAME
reclen \- fixed-length record input parser for gawk
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft CW
.nf
@load "reclen"
\&...
RECLEN = 42
\&...
reclen::drop("/some/file")
.fi
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I reclen
extension adds an input parser for reading fixed-length records, and a
function that can be used to stop reading fixed-length records.
.PP
If the
.B RECLEN
variable exists and has a value greater than zero when
.I gawk
goes to open a data file, this extension takes over and returns records
of length
.BR RECLEN .
The variable is checked before reading each record, so the AWK program
can change how much will be read as it goes along.
.PP
Setting
.B RECLEN
to zero causes any subsequent read of the file to return end of file to
.IR gawk .
.PP
In order to permanently stop reading fixed-length records and restore
.IR gawk\^ 's
normal reading mechanism, call
.B reclen::drop()
with the name of the file.
This is a one-way operation; going back to using
.B RECLEN
is then not possible without first closing the file.
.PP
.\" .SH BUGS
.SH EXAMPLE
.ft CW
.nf
@load "reclen"
\&...
BEGIN { RECLEN = 42 }
\&...
.fi
.ft R
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR "GAWK: Effective AWK Programming" ,
.SH AUTHOR
Arnold Robbins,
.BR arnold@skeeve.com .
.SH COPYING PERMISSIONS
Copyright \(co 2020,
Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.ig
Permission is granted to process this file through troff and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual page).
..
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual page under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual page into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in
a translation approved by the Foundation.
.\" vim: set filetype=nroff :
