.TH MBS 3am "Jun 07 2018" "Free Software Foundation" "GNU Awk Extension Modules"
.SH NAME
mbs \- work with multibyte strings
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft CW
.nf
@load "mbs"
.sp
byte_count = mbs_length(string)
count = mbs_split(string, array)
new_string = mbs_join(array)
width = mbs_wcswidth(string)
.fi
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I mbs
extension adds four functions,
as follows:
.TP
.BI mbs_length( string )
This function takes a string argument and returns the number of
bytes it contains.  This is useful in multibyte locales where
the number of characters does not equal the number of bytes.
.TP
.BI mbs_split( string ", " array )
This function takes a string value, and an array. It clears
the array, and then populates it with the numeric byte values in
the string
.RI ( not
the individual characters as strings).
It returns the number of elements in the array.
.TP
.BI mbs_join( array )
This function is the inverse of
.BR mbs_split() .
It takes an array of byte values and returns an AWK
string composed of those values.
.BR NOTE :
The function does
.I not
validate that the sequence of bytes creates valid
strings in the current encoding.
.TP
\fBmbs_wcswidth(\fIstring\fR[\fB, \fInot_utf8\^\fR]\fB)\fR
This function takes a string and computes the display width
(number of columns) taken up by the string. It is similar
in function to the standard C
.IR wcswidth (3)
library routine.
By default this function assumes that the current locale
is one based on UTF-8. If that is not the case, the caller
.I must
pass a second argument that is non-zero.
.RB ( NOTE :
The extension expects a numeric argument to be supplied, so
a string value will not work.)
.sp
The return value from
.B mbs_wcswidth()
can differ from that of the built-in
.B length()
function when the string contains combining characters and
other such unusual entities.
.SH NOTES
For the
.B mbs_wcswidth()
function, determining if the current locale is based on UTF-8 or not is
left up to you, the programmer. The locale naming conventions vary widely
(and wildly) from system to system, and this extension isn't going to
venture into that dragon-filled territory.
.\" .SH BUGS
.SH EXAMPLE
.ft CW
.nf
@load "mbs"
\&...
printf "The length in bytes of %s is %d\en", $0, mbs_length($0)
.fi
.ft R
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR wcswidth (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Arnold D. Robbins
.SH COPYING PERMISSIONS
Copyright \(co 2018,
Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.ig
Permission is granted to process this file through troff and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual page).
..
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual page under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual page into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in
a translation approved by the Foundation.
.\" vim: set filetype=nroff :
