\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@setfilename gawk-gd.info
@comment include version.texi

@set TITLE GD Processing With @command{gawk}
@set EDITION 1.0
@set UPDATE-MONTH November, 2014
@c gawk versions:
@set VERSION 4.1
@set PATCHLEVEL 1
@settitle GD Processing With @command{gawk} @value{VERSION}
@syncodeindex pg cp
@comment %**end of header

@copying
This is Edition @value{EDITION} of @cite{@value{TITLE}},
for the @value{VERSION}.@value{PATCHLEVEL} (or later) version of the GNU
implementation of AWK.
@sp 2
Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@sp 2
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'', the Front-Cover
texts being (a) (see below), and with the Back-Cover Texts being (b)
(see below).  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.

@enumerate a
@item
``A GNU Manual''

@item
``You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
funds for GNU development.''
@end enumerate
@end copying

@ifinfo
This file documents the GD processing extension in GNU @command{awk}.

@insertcopying
@end ifinfo

@dircategory Programming
@direntry
* gawk-gd: (gawk-gd)GD Graphics Extension Reference.		The gawk graphics extension.
@end direntry

@iftex
@set DOCUMENT book
@set CHAPTER chapter
@set SECTION section
@set DARKCORNER (d.c.)
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@set DOCUMENT Info file
@set CHAPTER major node
@set SECTION node
@set DARKCORNER (d.c.)
@end ifinfo
@ifhtml
@set DOCUMENT web page
@set CHAPTER chapter
@set SECTION section
@set DARKCORNER (d.c.)
@end ifhtml

@set FSF

@set FN file name
@set FFN File Name

@c merge the function and variable indexes into the concept index
@ifinfo
@synindex fn cp
@synindex vr cp
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@end iftex

@c If "finalout" is commented out, the printed output will show
@c black boxes that mark lines that are too long.  Thus, it is
@c unwise to comment it out when running a master in case there are
@c overfulls which are deemed okay.

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@comment smallbook

@setchapternewpage odd

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATE-MONTH}
@author J@"urgen Kahrs with contributions from
@author Stefan Tramm, Manuel Collado, Victor Paesa and Andrew Schorr

@c Include the Distribution inside the titlepage environment so
@c that headings are turned off.  Headings on and off do not work.

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@sp 2
Published by:
@sp 1

Free Software Foundation @*
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor @*
Boston, MA 02110-1335 USA @*
Phone: +1-617-542-5942 @*
Fax: +1-617-542-2652 @*
Email: @email{gnu@@gnu.org} @*
URL: @uref{http://www.gnu.org/} @*

@c ISBN 1-882114-??-0 @*

@insertcopying

@c @sp 2
@c Cover art by ?????.
@end titlepage

@iftex
@headings off
@evenheading @thispage@ @ @ @strong{@value{TITLE}} @| @|
@oddheading  @| @| @strong{@thischapter}@ @ @ @thispage
@end iftex

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top General Introduction
@comment node-name, next,          previous, up

This file documents the GD processing extension in GNU Awk (@command{gawk})
version 4.1.1 and later.

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* GD Graphics Extension Reference::
* Copying This Manual::
* Index::
@end menu

@node GD Graphics Extension Reference
@chapter GD Graphics Extension Reference

@cindex GD

The functions described here are intended to expose the GD graphics API
as documented at
@uref{http://www.boutell.com/gd/manual2.0.33.html}.
This documentation can be understood only in conjunction with the GD
documentation.

These functions  can be used by either invoking @command{gawk}
with a command-line argument of @option{-l gd} or by
inserting @code{@@load "gd"} in your script.

@table @code

@cindex @code{gdImageCreateFromFile} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageCreateFromFile(@var{img_dst}, @var{file_name})
Use this function to load images from PNG, JPG, GIF files,
instead of the original @code{gdImageCreateFromJpeg()},
@code{gdImageCreateFromPng()}, or @code{gdImageCreateFromGif()}.
It returns an image handle or an empty string if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImageCopyResampled} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageCopyResampled(@var{img_dst}, @var{img_src}, @var{dstX}, @var{dstY}, @var{srcX}, @var{srcY}, @var{destW}, @var{destH}, @var{srcW}, @var{srcH})
It returns 0 if succeeds or -1 if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImageCreateTrueColor} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageCreateTrueColor(@var{width}, @var{height})
It returns an image handle or an empty string if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImageDestroy} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageDestroy(@var{img})
It returns 0 if succeeds or -1 if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImagePngName} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImagePngName(@var{img}, @var{file_name})
Use this function to save images as PNG files,
instead of the original @code{gdImagePng()}.
It returns 0 if succeeds or -1 if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImageStringFT} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageStringFT(@var{img}, @var{brect}, @var{fg}, @var{fontname}, @var{ptsize}, @var{angle}, @var{x}, @var{y}, @var{string})
Use it to draw text. Notice that in brect it returns an array of 8 integers.
An empty AWK string in img means the same as a NULL img pointer in the original C funtion.
Remember to set the environment variable GDFONTPATH to your font path.
It returns an empty string if succeeds or a string with an error message if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImageColorAllocate} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageColorAllocate(@var{img}, @var{r}, @var{g}, @var{b})
It returns the RGB color, corresponding to the r,g,b values given, or -1 if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImageFilledRectangle} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageFilledRectangle(@var{img}, @var{x1}, @var{y1}, @var{x2}, @var{y2}, @var{color})
Fills rect with the given color.
It returns 0 if succeeds or -1 if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImageSetAntiAliasedDontBlend} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageSetAntiAliasedDontBlend(@var{img}, @var{color}, @var{dont_blend})
Don't blend this color when antialiasing.
It returns 0 if succeeds or -1 if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImageSetThickness} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageSetThickness(@var{img}, @var{thickness})
Sets thickness for line drawing.
It returns 0 if succeeds or -1 if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImageSX} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageSX(@var{img})
Returns image width, or -1 if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImageSY} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageSY(@var{img})
Returns image height, or -1 if fails.

@cindex @code{gdImageCompare} GD graphics extension function
@item gdImageCompare(@var{img1}, @var{img2})
Returns 0 if images are equal, or the values mentioned in GD's docs if they differ,
or 1<<14 if img1 is invalid, or 1<<15 if img2 is invalid.

@end table

@node Copying This Manual
@appendix Copying This Manual

@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::  License for copying this manual.
@end menu

@include fdl.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

